#separator:tab
#html:false
#deck:Network Automation::Module 1 - Python::S6-7 Return Types & JSON
#tags:module1-python session::6-7 autocor::1.4 topic::json topic::serialization topic::return-types
#columns:Front	Back
Your loop "for j in range(i+1, i+10)" works on your test config but could crash on a real one. When, and why does "min(i+10, len(lines))" fix it?	If an interface or router block starts within 10 lines of the END of the file, i+10 points past the last index, so lines[j] raises IndexError: list index out of range. min(i+10, len(lines)) caps the ceiling at the list length, so the loop never reads beyond the last real line. You write for configs you haven't seen yet.
get_hostname returns None when no hostname exists, but get_interfaces returns an empty list []. Why the difference, given similar-looking code?	get_hostname has its "return" INSIDE the loop, so if nothing matches, the loop ends, the function falls off, and Python returns None automatically. get_interfaces initializes "interface = []" before the loop and has "return interface" AFTER it, so with no matches it returns the empty list it started with.
Why is returning an empty list [] safer than returning None when nothing is found?	You can safely loop over [] (the body just doesn't run) and call len() on it. None crashes when you try to loop over it or treat it like a collection. So a function that returns a collection should default to an empty collection, not None.
A function returns a list on one path and the string "unknown" on another. Why is that a bug even if it runs?	A function should always return the SAME type regardless of which path executes. If callers get sometimes-a-list, sometimes-a-string, any downstream operation (like .upper() or iterating) will work on one and crash on the other. Consistent return types make a function predictable and safe to use.
Why should a batch tool that processes hundreds of configs NOT prompt the user to type a missing hostname?	Batch automation must run unattended. If it stops to ask a human for input on every missing field, it stalls — useless at 2 AM across 500 files. Instead it should substitute a graceful default (like "unknown") and keep going, so one bad file never blocks the whole run.
What is serialization, and why does it make the json module the bridge to network APIs?	Serialization converts an in-memory object (a Python dict/list) into flat text that can be saved to disk or sent over a network; deserialization reverses it. Network APIs (DNA Center, RESTCONF) speak JSON — you send JSON and receive JSON — so json.dump/load is the same skill you'll use for every API call.
You wrote "x = data.append(item)" and x became None. Why?	.append() mutates the list in place and returns None — it does not return the modified list. So assigning its result captures None. The correct pattern is just "data.append(item)" on its own line; the list itself already holds the change.
In "with open('out.json','w') as f: json.dump(data, f)", why must you pass f to json.dump when you already opened it with "as f"?	Opening the file just creates the handle f — it doesn't direct anything into it. json.dump needs two facts: WHAT to write (data) and WHERE to write it (f). You could have several files open; f tells dump exactly which one to write to. That's also why json.dumps (returns a string) needs no f.
Why should each parser return a raw value (like "R1") and let build_data wrap it, instead of get_hostname returning {"hostname": "R1"} itself?	Structure should be built in ONE place. If get_hostname also wraps, build_data wraps again and you get double-nesting like {"hostname": {"hostname": "R1"}}. Keeping parsers returning raw values and assembling the structure once keeps a single source of truth and avoids redundancy.
Why does opening a file in "w" mode deserve caution, and where should json.dump go relative to your file loop?	"w" mode overwrites the file's entire contents each time it's opened. So the write must happen ONCE, after you've collected all devices — not inside the per-file loop, or each iteration would overwrite the previous and you'd keep only the last device.
