#separator:tab
#html:false
#deck:Network Automation::Module 1 - Python::S9 Logging Strategy
#tags:module1-python session::9 autocor::3.2 autocor::3.3 topic::logging topic::levels topic::handlers
#columns:Front	Back
Your config_analyzer ran fine with print() for weeks, so you conclude print() is good enough for automation. A colleague asks "did R47 fail last Tuesday, and why?" Why can't print() answer that?	print() writes to stdout — an ephemeral stream tied to whatever terminal is attached at that moment. When the run ends, the output is gone; nothing is saved, so there is no historical record to consult weeks later. Even if you scrolled back, a bare print line has no timestamp (can't place it on "Tuesday") and no severity (can't separate a fatal failure from routine chatter). A real tool needs a durable, dated, leveled record — an audit trail — which is exactly what logging provides and print() structurally cannot.
You set level=logging.INFO. A teammate asks "don't you also need to add ERROR and CRITICAL so they show up?" Why is the answer no?	level= is not a list of levels to switch on — it's a single threshold, a floor. Each level is a number (DEBUG=10, INFO=20, WARNING=30, ERROR=40, CRITICAL=50) and the rule is "keep the record if its number >= the floor." Setting the floor at INFO (20) automatically passes everything >= 20, which already includes ERROR (40) and CRITICAL (50) — they are louder than the floor, so they are the last things to ever be filtered. You set one bar; everything at or above it clears.
You changed the floor from INFO to WARNING and your two INFO lines vanished while the ERROR survived. At which station did the INFO records die, and why did the ERROR pass?	They died at the level check (the filter station), before reaching any handler: INFO is 20, the floor is now 30, and 20 < 30 so those records are dropped immediately. The ERROR (40) passes because 40 >= 30. A threshold only ever drops what is below it and lets through everything at or above it — so raising the floor silences the quieter levels while the louder ones remain.
A missing config folder and a single unreadable file are both failures — why log one CRITICAL and the other ERROR, and how is that the same call you made in Session 8 with return vs continue?	The level is chosen by blast radius. CRITICAL = the whole run is dead (no folder means nothing to process, so you return/abort). ERROR = one unit of work failed but the program recovers and keeps going (one bad file, so you continue the loop). It is the identical recoverable-vs-fatal judgment from Session 8: the case where you wrote return maps to CRITICAL, the case where you wrote continue maps to ERROR. The control-flow reaction and the severity level are two expressions of one decision about how much died.
Your format string contains %(levelname)s and %(message)s, but you never defined those words anywhere. Where do their values come from?	They are predefined attributes that logging automatically attaches to every LogRecord it creates — a fixed, documented vocabulary (asctime, levelname, name, message, filename, lineno, ...), not names you invent. When you log, the formatter walks your format string and, for each %(field)s, looks up that field on the record and substitutes its value. Proof it is a fixed menu: omit %(name)s and the name simply never prints; write %(banana)s and it crashes, because there is no such field.
Trace it: why does %(message)s show your text and %(levelname)s show INFO? What did YOU do in the logger.info(...) call to set each one?	You set message by the string you passed as the argument — "run started" becomes the record's message. You set levelname by which method you chose: calling .info() makes the level INFO and levelname the string "INFO"; calling .error() instead would make it "ERROR" with the same text. logging files your method choice and your argument into the record under the standard names levelname and message, which your format then references. You supplied both — just not by typing those words.
Why must logging.basicConfig live in the __main__ block and never inside a function like get_hostname() — what concretely breaks for someone who imports your file?	Configuration is a once-per-application decision (how verbose, where logs go), and only the entry point knows how the program is being used. If basicConfig is inside get_hostname(), the moment an importer calls it your settings silently configure the root logger for their entire program — your format, your level, your destination — hijacking their logging. Worse, basicConfig only takes effect once, so whether your config or theirs wins depends on call order, and the importer loses all control. Functions should only get a logger and call it; the application configures once at the top.
You fetch your logger with getLogger(__name__), but basicConfig configures the root logger. Why does your named logger's output still appear?	Loggers form a hierarchy and records propagate upward. Your named logger has no handler of its own, so it passes the record up to its parent and ultimately to the root logger — which DOES have the handler basicConfig installed. Root's handler emits it. That is why the pattern works: you talk to your per-module logger (getLogger(__name__)), and you set up the destination once on root (basicConfig in __main__).
Why is logger.debug("%s", val) preferred over logger.debug(f"{val}") inside a logging call, even though f-strings are great everywhere else?	With an f-string the message is fully built every time the line runs, before debug() is even called — so you pay the formatting cost even when the record is below the floor and gets dropped. With parameterized logging (%s placeholders + args), logging defers the substitution and only does it if the record will actually be emitted. For a per-device debug line suppressed at INFO in production across hundreds of devices, that is hundreds of strings built and thrown away every run. Linters like pylint flag f-strings in logging calls for exactly this reason. Rule of thumb: f-strings everywhere except inside logging calls.
At DEBUG floor you saw 3 debug lines, not 4, even though sample_configs has 4 files. Why exactly 3?	Your debug line sits inside the try, after a successful parse. R1, R2, and R3 parse cleanly, so each logs one debug line = 3. realbinary.txt raises UnicodeDecodeError back in read_confg, before execution ever reaches the debug line, so control jumps to except and it logs an ERROR instead. The count reflects control flow: only files that actually reach the line produce it. (notatextfile.md is filtered out earlier by the .txt check, so it never even enters the try.)
Adding filename= to basicConfig made your terminal go completely silent. What changed in the pipeline, and where did the output go?	filename= tells basicConfig to build a FileHandler (writes to disk) instead of the default console StreamHandler. Same pipeline — logger, record, level, formatter — only the handler (the destination) changed. Since you also have no print() left anywhere, nothing reaches the console any more; every record is written to the log file instead. A silent terminal is not a failure here — it is the records going exactly where you sent them.
Your config_analyzer.log grows every run instead of resetting. Why — and why is that exactly what you want here?	FileHandler opens in append mode ('a') by default, so each run adds to the existing file rather than truncating it. That accumulation is precisely what an audit trail needs — history across runs, so you can answer "what happened last Tuesday." If it used 'w' mode it would wipe the file on every run and you would only ever keep the latest run's logs. It is the same 'w'-overwrites vs 'a'-appends distinction you learned for open() in Session 6-7.
Name the stations a log message travels through, and what is basicConfig really doing when you "only" call getLogger + basicConfig + a level method?	The pipeline is: Logger (what your code talks to) -> Record (the data package: message + time + level + source) -> Level check (drop if below the floor) -> Handler (where it goes: console or file) -> Formatter (the final text layout). basicConfig is not a separate component — it is a convenience that builds a handler, attaches a formatter, and sets the level in one call. So even when you "only" use getLogger + basicConfig + the level methods, all five parts are present; basicConfig just assembled the handler and formatter behind your back.
None of your tool's events were logged as WARNING. Where would a WARNING belong, and how is it different from ERROR?	WARNING = something surprising or degraded happened but the operation still succeeded; ERROR = an operation actually failed. In your tool, get_hostname falling back to "unknown" when no hostname line exists, or get_interfaces skipping a line whose IP failed validation, are textbook WARNINGs: the parse completed but quietly degraded. Nothing failed, so it is not ERROR; but it is not routine either, so it is louder than INFO. The ladder: DEBUG=developer detail, INFO=normal milestone, WARNING=surprising but survived, ERROR=operation failed, CRITICAL=program can't continue.
Why call logging.getLogger(__name__) per module instead of just using logging.info(...) on the root logger directly?	getLogger(__name__) gives you a logger named after the module, so in a multi-file program every line is traceable to its source (via %(name)s) and each module's verbosity can be tuned independently. Calling logging.info(...) goes through the unnamed root logger, losing that attribution and lumping every module together. It also keeps the producer/configurer split clean: named loggers (used everywhere) produce messages, while the application configures the root once — the separation that lets your code be safely imported by other programs.
