#separator:tab
#html:false
#deck:Network Automation::Module 1 - Python::S14 Modules & Imports (code organization)
#tags:module1-python session::14 autocor::1.4 topic::modules topic::imports topic::circular-import topic::refactoring
#columns:Front	Back
In Python, what makes a file a 'module', and what three things happen the first time you run 'import classparser'?	Every .py file is already a module — the module name is just the filename minus .py (classparser.py is the module classparser); there is no special declaration needed. On the first import, Python does three things: (1) FINDS the file (it searches the current folder first, then other locations on its path); (2) RUNS it top to bottom exactly once, executing every def, class, and top-level statement; (3) BINDS the resulting names (like ConfigAnalyzer, ipadd) so other code can reach them. 'Runs once' matters: importing the same module again reuses the already-loaded copy rather than re-running it.
What is the difference between 'import classparser' and 'from classparser import ConfigAnalyzer', both in how you call the name and in what lands in your namespace?	'import classparser' binds only the module object, so you must prefix: classparser.ConfigAnalyzer(lines). 'from classparser import ConfigAnalyzer' pulls the single name straight into YOUR module's namespace, so you call it bare: ConfigAnalyzer(lines) — and crucially it also means your module now HOLDS that name (it can be re-imported from you). Both are valid; the 'from' form is terser but plants the name in your namespace, which has a side effect (re-export) worth remembering.
Why split one working config_analyzer.py into config_analyzer.py + classparser.py at all — what is 'separation of concerns' and its rule of thumb?	Separation of concerns means grouping code by responsibility so each file has ONE job. config_analyzer.py was doing five jobs (parse, read files, orchestrate the run, export CSV, diff devices). The parser (ConfigAnalyzer) is reusable pure logic — no folders, no disk, no printing — so another program could import just that without dragging along the __main__ runner; that is why it moved into classparser.py. Rule of thumb: a module should have ONE reason to change. If you'd edit the parsing regex and the CSV columns for unrelated reasons, they belong in different files.
After the split, which file imports which, and what is the rule about 'dependency direction'?	config_analyzer.py needs the class, so it does 'from classparser import ConfigAnalyzer' — the dependency arrow points config_analyzer -> classparser (high-level orchestration depends on low-level reusable logic). classparser.py imports NOTHING from config_analyzer. The rule: keep imports one-way. Put shared/low-level code at the bottom and let higher-level code depend downward; never let the low-level module reach back up.
What is a circular import, why does it crash, and how do you avoid it?	A circular import is two modules that import each other (A imports from B while B imports from A). It crashes because when Python starts loading A it pauses to load B, but B immediately needs a name from A that hasn't been defined yet — so you get a confusing half-loaded ImportError. Avoid it by designing a clear dependency direction: low-level reusable module at the bottom, orchestration on top, arrows pointing one way only. In this project classparser must never import from config_analyzer.
ConfigAnalyzer.get_interfaces calls ipadd(...). When the class moved to classparser.py, why did ipadd HAVE to move with it, and what breaks if you leave ipadd behind in config_analyzer.py?	A method looks up a bare name (ipadd) in the namespace of the module where the method is DEFINED, not where it is called from. So with the class living in classparser.py, ipadd must also be in classparser.py or the call raises NameError: name 'ipadd' is not defined. The only alternative — having classparser import ipadd back from config_analyzer — reverses the dependency arrow and creates a circular import. Rule of thumb: a helper travels with its only caller; keep the reusable module self-contained.
You moved ConfigAnalyzer out of config_analyzer.py into classparser.py, yet the test's old line 'from config_analyzer import ConfigAnalyzer' still passed. Why?	Because config_analyzer.py contains 'from classparser import ConfigAnalyzer', which binds the name ConfigAnalyzer INTO config_analyzer's own namespace — config_analyzer now accidentally RE-EXPORTS it. So 'from config_analyzer import ConfigAnalyzer' finds that re-exported name and works. It works by accident of an implementation detail, not because the class is defined there.
Importing ConfigAnalyzer from config_analyzer (which merely re-exports it) is fragile. What single edit to config_analyzer.py would suddenly turn that import red with ImportError, even though the class still works perfectly in classparser.py?	Switching config_analyzer.py to the other valid style: 'import classparser' plus calling 'classparser.ConfigAnalyzer(lines)'. That removes the bare name ConfigAnalyzer from config_analyzer's namespace, so nothing re-exports it anymore, and 'from config_analyzer import ConfigAnalyzer' dies with 'ImportError: cannot import name ConfigAnalyzer from config_analyzer' — while the class is alive and well in classparser.py. The import was coupled to HOW config_analyzer happens to import things, not to the real source.
What is the rule for WHERE a test (or any code) should import a name from, and how was the test fixed this session?	Rule: import a name from where it is DEFINED, not from a module that merely re-exports it. The class is defined in classparser and read_confg is defined in config_analyzer, so the test was fixed to two lines: 'from classparser import ConfigAnalyzer' and 'from config_analyzer import read_confg'. This points each import at its true home, so the test no longer breaks if config_analyzer changes its own import style.
How was this refactor kept safe, and why does that matter for refactoring generally?	The 7-test suite was green BEFORE the split (a green baseline), then re-run after moving the class and fixing imports (still 7 green), and finally the script was run end-to-end (python3 config_analyzer.py) to confirm the cross-module import resolves at runtime too, not just under pytest. This is refactor-under-tests discipline: a refactor changes structure WITHOUT changing behavior, and the test suite is the safety net that proves behavior stayed the same. Without tests, moving code between files is guesswork.
